Jazz poetry began during jazz’s infancy in the 1920s. Langston Hughes, the first poet especially devoted to jazz, got the idea to use it from Vachel Lindsay, his mentor1. In the 1920s and 30s, Hart Crane, Carl Sandburg, and Mina Loy were pioneers of jazz poetry. In the 1950s, jazz-related poetry was popularized by the Beat Generation, and there were frequent jazz-meets-poetry events. Kenneth Patchen came to New York from California in the spring of 1959 to collaborate with bassist Charles Mingus and Mingus’s tenor saxophonist Booker Ervin at Julian Beck’s Living Theatre. They improvised around themes, such as Patchen’s poem “The Murder of Two Men by a Young Kid Wearing Lemon-colored Gloves," which consists of the suspenseful word “Wait” splattered Pollock-style across the page until the final line, “NOW.”2

With the rise of the Bebop Revolution in the 1940s, Kenneth Rexroth, who wrote reviews of jazz and a libretto performed by the Modern Jazz Quartet, encouraged the Beats to use the music in their work.3Frank O’Hara wrote heavily anthologized jazz-related poems. More recently, poets like Etheridge Knight, Lynda Hull, Robert Creeley, and Paul Zimmer, have used jazz in way that it is elemental to understanding their work. However, it wasn’t until the early 1990s that a deliberate effort was made by editors to anthologize jazz poems and pinpoint a canon of jazz poetry. Since then, jazz has become the raw material for hundreds of contemporary poems internationally.

The Jazz Poetry Anthology, and its sister volume, The Second Set, both edited by Sascha Feinstein and Yusef Komunyakaa, were significant in establishing this definitive sub-genre. In the preface to The Jazz Poetry Anthology, the editors make a point about the confluence of race, jazz, and poetics:

“Obviously, and  randiantly, when attempting to place African-American poetry in its historical and social perspective...it is impossible not to address the synthesis of verse and music (specifically jazz and blues)....And, yes, undoubtedly much of black poetry has been associated with black music, and at times almost stereotypically so; what is surprising, however, is to realize how widely jazz has influenced poetry outside the black community—internationally. The music has broken social and cultural barriers, leapfrogging the guard of the black literary community, and has significantly influenced much of contemporary poetry.” 4

 
Jazz and pop culture do'n reall have a similar origin 

This breaking of cultural barriers was already true as early as 1926, as seen in the poetry of Langston Hughes and Hart Crane. These two poets used jazz in the same year and city (New York) as a catalyst for their poems, but in different ways. Hughes, for whom the blues form was indistinguishable from poetry, used a jazz aesthetic as a way of talking about culture, race, history, and as a choice—perhaps emblematic of the jazz aesthetic—to be joyful in spite of conditions. Crane, on the other hand, used a jazz aesthetic as a lens or rhythm by which he could discuss the city, his psychological state, and the mania of his enthusiasm for the freedoms jazz represents.
